Hi Jordan.

Here is my procedure for locating asteroids in SDSS images. I think it 
would make an excellent addition to the SkyServer activities, 
particularly the one on asteroids. Some editing may be necessary; just 
let me know.

-----begin

Finding asteroids in SDSS images can be tedious when done by simple 
visual inspection of the images. A more efficient way it to use 
computer software to help find asteroids. Traditionally, this involves 
taking an image of the same part of the sky at no fewer than two 
different instants and then using computer software to "stack" the 
images, which simply means to overlay the two images so that 
corresponding stars are aligned. The computer software then rapidly 
displays the individual images in succession, a technique called 
"blinking". The stars, being fixed objects, do not wiggle but 
asteroids, being moving targets, will appear to wiggle from image to 
image. SDSS images allow us to use a slight variation on this technique 
that relies on the fact that an image of a given part of the sky is 
taken with different filters at slightly different times. Unlike 
optical images, in which asteroids show up with the same color from 
image to image, SDSS images show asteroids in two different colors. An 
SDSS image is also a composite of three different colored images and 
each separate component image is taken at a slightly different time 
from the other images. Think of an SDSS image as three different images 
that have been digitally "stacked" as described above. If we could 
somehow "unstack" an SDSS image and then "blink" the individual 
component images, we might just be able to detect asteroids! In 
practice, this technique works and here is how to do it.

The first step is to obtain a computer program that will manipulate the 
images for us. An excellent choice is ImageJ, developed by the National 
Institutes of Health. ImageJ is a Java program that runs under Linux, 
Mac OS 9, and Mac OS X, and Windows. It is freely available by download 
at the URL <http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/>. Your computer must have the 
capability to run Java programs. Your instructor or teacher can give 
you more information about making sure your computer can run Java 
programs as some additional software may be necessary if not already 
present. ImageJ has many advanced features needed for different kinds 
of image analysis, including astronomical work and medical work. If you 
have not done so, or if your instructor has not yet done so, you will 
need to download and install ImageJ on your computer. Instructions are 
provided in the download archive.

The second step, assuming ImageJ is now properly installed on your 
computer, is to get an SDSS image. You can use the Get Fields tool to 
retrieve an image given its run, camcol, and field numbers. Be sure to 
get the largest image you can, 1984x1361 pixels. This will make seeing 
the asteroids visually easier. Once you have an image, use your browser 
to save the image to your desktop. We recommend that you rename the 
image according to its run, camcol, and field. The example image we are 
using has been named r752c1f373.jpg, indicating Run 752, Camcol 1, 
Field 373. Note that the image has been saved in JPG format, which is 
fine for our purposes.

The third step is to load the image into ImageJ for analysis. Your 
instructor or teacher will give you instructions on how to start the 
ImageJ program. Once it has been started, select File -> Open from the 
program's menu and load your image into ImageJ. The image will then be 
displayed in a window on your screen.

The fourth step is to separate the composite image into its three 
component images. The composite image is called an RGB image, meaning a 
combination of red, green, and blue images. Actually, these are just 
names given to the three component images and they might not 
necessarily correspond to actual red, green, or blue as we usually 
think of them. This is not important for our purposes however. To do 
this in ImageJ, select Image -> Color -> RGB Split. You will see the 
original image replaced by three separate images. Note that each one 
will be labeled with its component color.

The fifth step is to create an image "stack" with the three component 
images. To do this, select Image -> Stacks -> Convert Images to Stack. 
We now have one single image again, or so it appears. In a way, we are 
just undoing the separation we just performed but that is not exactly 
what we are doing. We are instructing ImageJ to put the component 
images together in a way that allows us to animate them, blinking them 
in quick succession.

The sixth step is to animate the stack to see what wiggles. To do that, 
select Image -> Stacks -> Start Animation. By default, ImageJ will 
cycle through the three component images at one second intervals, but 
this interval can be adjusted if desired. Depending on your computer's 
speed and memory capacity, blinking may slow down your computer and it 
may be slow to respond to key and mouse movements. A better option 
might be to use the > and < keys to manually cycle through the 
component images so you can start and stop as you wish. Stars and 
galaxies in the images will remain stationary with respect to each 
other. Their brightnesses may change, but their positions will not 
change. If you see a dot that moves as ImageJ blinks the images, you 
have most likely found an asteroid! You can get the location of your 
find by moving the mouse cursor to the dot that moves. The coordinates 
of this dot, in pixels, will be displayed in the main ImageJ window, 
the one with the tool buttons. In our sample image, a moving object is 
seen at coordinates X=894, Y=225. You should always look at the same 
coordinates in the original image, which you can reload into ImageJ 
using File -> Open again, to confirm whether or not there is actually 
something there. An asteroid on the original image will show up as two 
close but separate dots, one usually green and the other usually blue. 
In accordance with good scientific practice, your asteroid discoveries 
should always be followed up by visual inspection of the original 
image. When you record your findings, be sure to include the 
coordinates of each asteroid in your records so that other astronomers 
can verify your findings and use them for future work and for 
reference. Upon looking at the original image, we surely do see a pair 
of blue and green dots at very close to the location above. You can 
always zoom the image to get more precise coordinate readings.

-----end

Are there any more details I should include? How about screenshots?

Cheers,
Joe Heafner -- Astronomy/Physics Instructor (by some definitions)
